plans/2025-09-21T21:00:00-Accuracy Evaluation Implementation.md, before:

# Method Evaluation Implementation Plan

## Overview

Clean accuracy evaluation for pen-and-paper geometric mean approximation methods:
1. **Log-Linear Interpolation** - Uses digit count as logarithm proxy with linear interpolation
2. **Table-Based Approximation** - Uses memorized 10^(1/10) lookup table for logarithm conversion

## Architecture Principles

- **Trait-only public API**: Internal functions private, forcing consistent interface usage
- **Streaming evaluation**: Iterator-based processing, no large Vec allocations
- **Simplified metrics**: Focus on mean absolute relative error as primary comparison
- **Clean separation**: Evaluation logic separate from presentation
- **Set the Stage**: This change should lay the ground work for comparison, not boil the ocean

## Key Design Decisions

### Trait-Only Public API
```rust
// traits.rs
pub trait EstimateGeometricMean {
    type Error: std::error::Error;
    fn estimate_geometric_mean(values: &[f64]) -> Result<f64, Self::Error>;
}
```
The estimate method should be static, so we don't have to construct anything for a clearer interface.

**Rationale**: Our evaluator should be able to evaluate _any_ estimation method, we'll use traits to allow this.

This is (mostly) an additive change only, keep the diffs minimal.

#### Associated Error Types
Different methods have different input constraints:
- **Exact method**: EmptyInput, NonPositiveValue
- **Approximation methods**: EmptyInput, NonPositiveValue, ValueTooSmall
**Rationale**: Avoids forcing impossible error variants on exact method.

#### Testing

All tests for estimated methods use trait interface exclusively - internal functions for approximations should be set to private.
No new tests are required in estimation modules.
The exact method should have just a handful of tests that confirms that the exported geometric_mean function and the trait implementation are identical.

**Rationale**: Trait is the public API, must be proven correct. Code not tested is not exposed, code that's exposed is tested.

### Evaluation Module

The evaluator module only has the following public interface.
This module does _absolutely no_ formatting or printing, just pure statistical analysis.

```rust
pub fn evaluate_estimate<R: Rng, T: EstimateGeometricMean>(rng: &mut R, method: T, min: f64, max: f64, num_tests: usize) -> Results
```

This method should iterate in place or steam or fold to prevent allocation of large lists of of tests inputs or outputs.
It accepts a min and a max, because our estimation methods don't support the full range of finite floats, even though the exact method does.

The values generated in the range should be log-uniform.
The trivia problem assumes that values are distributed in this way, so this is a reasonable assumption to test under.

The primary property test here is that when evaluating the exact method _as_ the estimate, the result should be perfect.

#### Simplified Statistics
```rust
pub struct Results {
    mean_absolute_relative_error: f64,
    total_tests: usize,
}
```

More summary statistics will be added in future changes.
The goal of this change is to set the stage.

## Comparison

Direct comparison only occurs in the main method, as very simple print out.
Iteration count will be hard-coded.
In the future a more robust interface will be offered, we're just looking to set the stage.

No tests here, this is a dead simple demo.

## Testing Strategy
- **Prefer property tests** - Better bang for the buck
- **Example-based tests are still valuable** - Better for validating key special cases, and reader-optimized examples
- **Don't disguise example-based as property** - Just make those regular unit tests

## Rejected Alternatives

### Error Handling Approaches
1. **Shared error type** - Would force exact method to expose impossible ValueTooSmall variant

### Test Data Range Handling
1. **Min/max as trait methods** - Feels wrong, adds complexity to trait interface
2. **Discard inputs that return errors** - Wasteful, reduces test coverage
3. **Check errors in evaluator** - Still need to handle them somehow, doesn't solve root issue

### Randomness Approaches
1. **Fixed seed parameter** - Less flexible, global state concerns
2. **Thread-local RNG** - Global state, harder to test deterministically

### Comparison instead of Evaluation module
1. **Compare and Evaluate simultaneously** - Greater decoupling gives greater flexibility

Commit message:

Further clarify the need to not allocate Vecs in evaluation.

plans/2025-09-21T21:00:00-Accuracy Evaluation Implementation.md, after:

# Method Evaluation Implementation Plan

## Overview

Clean accuracy evaluation for pen-and-paper geometric mean approximation methods:
1. **Log-Linear Interpolation** - Uses digit count as logarithm proxy with linear interpolation
2. **Table-Based Approximation** - Uses memorized 10^(1/10) lookup table for logarithm conversion

## Architecture Principles

- **Trait-only public API**: Internal functions private, forcing consistent interface usage
- **Streaming evaluation**: Iterator-based processing, no large Vec allocations
- **Simplified metrics**: Focus on mean absolute relative error as primary comparison
- **Clean separation**: Evaluation logic separate from presentation
- **Set the Stage**: This change should lay the ground work for comparison, not boil the ocean

## Key Design Decisions

### Trait-Only Public API
```rust
// traits.rs
pub trait EstimateGeometricMean {
    type Error: std::error::Error;
    fn estimate_geometric_mean(values: &[f64]) -> Result<f64, Self::Error>;
}
```
The estimate method should be static, so we don't have to construct anything for a clearer interface.

**Rationale**: Our evaluator should be able to evaluate _any_ estimation method, we'll use traits to allow this.

This is (mostly) an additive change only, keep the diffs minimal.

#### Associated Error Types
Different methods have different input constraints:
- **Exact method**: EmptyInput, NonPositiveValue
- **Approximation methods**: EmptyInput, NonPositiveValue, ValueTooSmall
**Rationale**: Avoids forcing impossible error variants on exact method.

#### Testing

All tests for estimated methods use trait interface exclusively - internal functions for approximations should be set to private.
No new tests are required in estimation modules.
The exact method should have just a handful of tests that confirms that the exported geometric_mean function and the trait implementation are identical.

**Rationale**: Trait is the public API, must be proven correct. Code not tested is not exposed, code that's exposed is tested.

### Evaluation Module

The evaluator module only has the following public interface.
This module does _absolutely no_ formatting or printing, just pure statistical analysis.

```rust
pub fn evaluate_estimate<R: Rng, T: EstimateGeometricMean>(rng: &mut R, method: T, min: f64, max: f64, num_tests: usize) -> Results
```

This method should iterate in place or steam or fold to prevent allocation of large lists of of tests inputs or outputs.
Don't do something like `let mut values = Vec::with_capacity(test_size);` or `Vec::new()` because this potentially allocates an Vec with billions or trillions of entries!
We need to have O(1) memory usage, because we want to be able to do extremely huge experiments.

This method accepts a min and a max, because our estimation methods don't support the full range of finite floats, even though the exact method does.

The values generated in the range should be log-uniform.
The trivia problem assumes that values are distributed in this way, so this is a reasonable assumption to test under.

The primary property test here is that when evaluating the exact method _as_ the estimate, the result should be perfect.

#### Simplified Statistics
```rust
pub struct Results {
    mean_absolute_relative_error: f64,
    total_tests: usize,
}
```

More summary statistics will be added in future changes.
The goal of this change is to set the stage.

## Comparison

Direct comparison only occurs in the main method, as very simple print out.
Iteration count will be hard-coded.
In the future a more robust interface will be offered, we're just looking to set the stage.

No tests here, this is a dead simple demo.

## Testing Strategy
- **Prefer property tests** - Better bang for the buck
- **Example-based tests are still valuable** - Better for validating key special cases, and reader-optimized examples
- **Don't disguise example-based as property** - Just make those regular unit tests

## Rejected Alternatives

### Error Handling Approaches
1. **Shared error type** - Would force exact method to expose impossible ValueTooSmall variant

### Test Data Range Handling
1. **Min/max as trait methods** - Feels wrong, adds complexity to trait interface
2. **Discard inputs that return errors** - Wasteful, reduces test coverage
3. **Check errors in evaluator** - Still need to handle them somehow, doesn't solve root issue

### Randomness Approaches
1. **Fixed seed parameter** - Less flexible, global state concerns
2. **Thread-local RNG** - Global state, harder to test deterministically

### Comparison instead of Evaluation module
1. **Compare and Evaluate simultaneously** - Greater decoupling gives greater flexibility
